Links for the video :

GPF-JS project homepage
https://github.com/ArnaudBuchholz/gpf-js

JavaScript & Development blog
http://gpf-js.blogspot.com/

Documentation: Entity definition
https://arnaudbuchholz.github.io/gpf/doc/tutorial-DEFINE.html

Article: My own super implementation
https://gpf-js.blogspot.com/2017/02/my-own-super-implementation.html

Object.create documentation
https://developer.mozilla.org/fr/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Objets_globaux/Object/create

#1
Subclassing an ES6 class
... or the art of JavaScript classes hybridization

The picture on the left illustrates the concept with a natural hybridization
on flowers. As you can see, some have composite colors.

#2
This presentation will start with the motivation behind this experiment.

It will also cover how classes can be defined in JavaScript.
In particular, it will expose one implementation that was possible before
the introduction of the ES6 class keyword.

Then, we will see how and if old and new classes can be mixed.
Mixing meaning here defining a new class by inheriting from an existing one.

Because it will fail, we will analyze the reasons of the failure
and see how we can workaround the problems.

#3
This presentation refers to some of my personal projects,
in particular GPF-JS which is a multi-purpose JavaScript library

and a blog named JavaScript & Development where I documented all the discoveries
related to GPF-JS

#4
So...

(click)

What is the motivation of this experiment ?

#5
GPF-JS is a multi purpose JavaScript library.

When I started the project, I had no clear idea of where I wanted to go
but I set myself some expectations :
- The library supports multiple hosts : besides the classical browsers and
  Node.js, it also runs fine on cscript, Nashorn, Rhino and PhantomJS
- The library implements a long list of interesting features, such as 
  a class system, an interface layer, streams, a modularization helper,
  attributes...

It is fully tested and documented in the blog.

#6
Because all the target hosts are not supporting ES6,
GPF-JS introduces a custom class system which relies on the syntax presented here.

The gpf.define method takes a dictionary which specifies :
- The class name with the property $class
- The base class (if any), using the $extend
- The constructor method
- And you can also add any other method to this class definition.

You may notice that the super keyword is somewhat simulated through the $super
method that is used in the constructor.

Without it, you would have to explicitely call A.apply(this, arguments)
to initialize the instance.

If you are interested, the links to the documentation and the related article
are in the video notes.

#7
But, actually, gpf.define is also the place where lots of features are introduced
in GPF-JS. At some point, it became necessary to validate that it could be used
with an existing ES6 class.

So the following code was tried.

#8
Unfortunately, it failed with the error
"Class constructor A cannot be invoked without 'new'"

#9
To understand the error, we need to get back to what are classes in JavaScript.

#10
Before the introduction of the 'class' keyword in the language,
there are several patterns to define a 'class' in JavaScript.

Here is the pattern used in GPF-JS.

From a declaration point of view, a class is first defined with a constructor.
The constructor is a function.
In this example it is named "OldA".

Then, the function prototype is altered to define members that will be
inherited by the instances of that class.

For instance, two members are defined :
- The constructor method.
  This special member exists in all classes and it refers to the method being used to create and
  initialize any object of that class.
  In modern hosts, it is not necessary to define this member but keep in mind that very old hosts are supported by GPF-JS.

- The second member is the method named "a" that gives the value of the member "_a".

(click)

When Subclassing, another constructor is defined, here it is named "OldB".
To intialize the instance, the base constructor must be called,
that is why we trigger the OldA method with apply to forward this and arguments.

The prototype of the subclass is initialized with a new object which prototype
equals the prototype of OldA. This is done using Object.create.

This way, we build the prototype chain of OldB.
Indeed, every instance of OldB has a prototype that contains OldB specific methods
and since it is chained to the OldA prototype, it also contains OldA specific
methods.

Then, two members are defined.
Quick notes about OldB constructor :
- Since both prototypes contains the same member (named "constructor"), the one from OldB will shadow the one from OldA.
- Even in modern javascript hosts, because of the way we build the prototype chain, it is necessary to define the constructor for subclass
  or it would point to the one of OldA.

Long story short, it is possible to create classes but it requires a lot of plumbing to make it work as expected.

#11
When we look at the way ES6 handles classes, it is simpler.

To create a class, simply use the class keyword and define the constructor as
well as any other method.

(click)

When subclassing, just specify which class you subclass with the "extends" keyword
and call the base constructor using "super()".

In the end, it hides the complexity of building the prototype chain.

#12
If we try to extend an "old" class using the new syntax, it works smoothly.
It is not even necessary to handle the base constructor in a special way,
the "super()" call works transparently.

This is interesting because it demonstrates that the way classes are defined without the keyword is close to (or at least compatible with) the new way.

#13
If, on the other hand, we try to subclass an ES6 class with the old pattern, then it fails with the error
"Class constructor A cannot be invoked without 'new'"

An obvious hint here is that we might not use the base class function the right way.

#14
So let's focus on this error.

#15
In JavaScript, any function may be a constructor.
However, native functions (the ones implemented by the host) can't be used with new.

```javascript
new unescape()
```

Hence if you try to use "new unescape()" you will get the error "unescape is not a constructor".

Besides this exception, the syntax is not enforced.
The keyword this may be accessed without calling the parent constructor first.
In a constructor, one may replace the allocated object (contained in this) by another object.

This is typically how the singleton patterns can be implemented.

On the other hand, when an ES6 class is created, it declares a constructor function.
But, this time, the syntax is enforced meaning :
- trying to call the constructor without the new keyword fails

```javascript
class A {}
A()
```

- trying to access this before initializing it with the parent constructor generates the error "Must call super constructor in derived class before accessing 'this' or returning from derived constructor"

```javascript
class B extends A {
  constructor () {
    this._b = "B"
  }
}

new B()
```

However, the good news is that ES6 constructors can be detected !

```javascript
B.toString().startsWith("class")
```

#16
So for the rest of the presentation, let's try to see how we can make it work.

#17
Let's start by setting the context and expectations.

Based on the GPF-JS class model, a constructor function is required to
initialize the class instance. It might not be the same function as the class one.
Meaning, it is acceptable to wrap the constructor function into another one.

To respect the programming model, we will use this.$super to call the base
constructor.

Ideally, we have to ensure that this.$super is called before any use of this
otherwise the construction should fail.

#18
To validate the expectations, a simple test case is created.

We define two ES6 classes: A and B. B inherits from A the ES6 way.

Finally we define the constructor function for a third class (named C).

The class B constructor expects one parameter, we pass it through the use of
this.$super that is the first instruction of the constructorOfC.

Obviously, we also need assertions, so here is a fiddle to see what is tested.

(open JSFiddle)

In the last part, we instanciate the class C
Then we assess that it is an instance of A
(because of inheritance)
And we validate that it contains the member _a
(it checks that the constructor was called)
We do the same with class B
And then we assess everything related to class C

If we run the example as is, we see the result.
(click on Result)

Only c is an instance of C

(close JSFiddle)

#19
How do we fill the function C to leverage the constructorOfC and pass all
the tests

In this first attempt, we will use a technic that I name the copycat

#20
The whole idea consists of creating a new ES6 class where the constructor function
body is based on the body of constructorOfC.
But, this.$super is replaced with the ES6 keyword super.

To do so, we use the new Function pattern which allows to build a function from 
its textual body. But such a function does not have any context.
To pass the base class, we will create a factory that takes the base
class as a parameter.

#21
The code looks like that.

A regular expression is used to capture the parameter list and the body of
constructorOfC and we replace the occurence of "this.$super" with "super".
The whole thing is wrapped in a class definition that is returned where B is the
parameter of the factory function.

If we check the fiddle
(open JSFiddle)

The result looks good !

(close JSFiddle)

#22
It works, but...

(click)

By copying the body of constructorOfC, we lose the lexical scope it was defined
in. If constructorOfC is a closure and use variables coming from the scope where
it is define, this scope will not be reproduced in the new verion.

#23
Let's try a different approach.
This time we will see what happens if we apply constructorOfC on this.

#24
Since the context of constructorOfC must not be lost, we must find a way to
apply it as is. What will happen ?

#25
We know that "this.$super" is used to call super, so we can simply define
a member on the class that maps $super to the proper call (super.constructor()).

The constructor of class C simply calls constructorOfC with apply to pass this
and the parameters (using the arguments object).

(open JSFiddle)

Let see the result

(go to Result tab)

We get an error

(close JSFiddle)

The error is "Uncaught ReferenceError: Must call super constructor in derived
class before accessing 'this' or returning from derived constructor"

Which means we tried to use this before it was properly initialized with super.

Indeed, since we call this.$super to access the super function, it can't work.


